# Sorting-
Implemented sorting techniques from scratch using java

PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE : JAVA

THERE ARE 3 FILES:
Sorting.java , README.TXT, PROJECTREPORT.DOCX

EACH FILE IS EXPLAINED:

Sorting.java: THIS FILE CONTAINS THE MAIN FUNCTION AND SHOULD BE EXECUTED IN ORDER TO RUN THE PROGRAM.
THIS FILE CONSISTS OF ALL THE SORTING TECHNIQUES WHICH ARE GIVEN IN THE QUESTION.
DIFFERENT SORTING TECHNIQUES ARE KEPT IN A SWITCH STATEMENT.
IF WE WANT TO CHOOSE THE TECHNIQUE, THEN CHOOSE ACCORDINGLY,

1.MERGE SORT
2.HEAP SORT
3.QUICK SORT REGULAR METHOD.
4.QUICK SORT 3-MEDIAN METHOD.
5.INSERTION SORT
6.SELECTION SORT
7.BUBBLE SORT

IN THIS PROGRAM WE USED RANDOM FUNCTION WHICH GENERATES RANDOM INPUT VALUES WHEN WE GIVE HOW MANY INPUTS WE WANT OT ENTER.

BY USING SWITCH CASE WE SELECT THE SORTING TECHNIQUE AND BY USING System.nanoTime() function we get the runtime in nano seconds for how much time the sorting method is taking to sort the input values.

BY USING SYSTEM.NANOTIME() WE COMPARE THE TIME TAKEN BY DIFFERENT SORTING TECHNIQUES TO SORT THE VALUES ACCORDING TO INPUTS.

RANDOM INPUTS WHICH ARE GENERATED BY RANDOM FUNCTION ARE STORED IN AN ARRAY.
AND WE USED print_array TO PRINT THE VALUES.

IN THIS PROGRAM WE USED DIFFERENT FUNCTIONS LIKE
- print_array() : to print the values in to array and also the sorted values.
- swap() : used to swap the values if necessary in sorting techniques.
- Merge and merge_sort() : these functions are used to sort the array by using merge sort technique.
- heap_sort() , build_heap() ,   heapify() : these functions are used to sort the array by using heap sort technique.
- recursive_QuickSort() , partition_quicksort() ; these functions are used to sort array by regular quick sort
- three_median() , quick_sort3() , partition_quicksort3(), sort_quick : these are the functions used to sort the array using quick sort using 3 medians.
- insertion_sort : function used  to sort the array using insertion sort
- selection_sort : function used  to sort the array using selection sort
- bubble_sort : function used  to sort the array using bubble sort

TO RUN THE CODE:
IN COMMAND PROMPT:
SET THE PATH TO THE DIRECTORY WHERE THE FILE EXISTS BY USING THE COMMAND cd
IF IT IS ON DESKTOP THEN:
-> CD DESKTOP
THEN EXECUTE THE PROGRAM BY USING FOLLOWING COMMANDS:
-> javac Sorting.java
To RUN 
-> java Sorting
THEN WE GET DIFFERENT  SORTING CHOICES TO CHOOSE AS MENTIONED ABOVE.
WE NEED TO CHOOSE AMONG THEM.

THEN WE NEED TO ENTER THE NUMBER OF INPUTS WE WANT.  WE USED RANDOM FUNCTION , IT GENERATES RANDOM INPUT VALUES AS THERE IS NO HARD CODED INPUTS.

AFTER CHOOSING THE SORTING TECHNIQUE ,
WE GET OUTPUT WITH SORTED ARRAY AND TIME TAKEN TO SORT THE VALUES.

AND THEN THERE IS STATEMENT ASKING WHETHER TO CONTINUE 

CONTINUE=1 OR EXIT=0

PROJECTREPORT.DOCX- CONSISTS OF DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT.







